[Lens] Page for bar charts (#4057)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/visualize/charts/bar-charts.md

5. Optionally add a [**Break down by**](#breakdown-options) dimension to split each bar into segments, creating stacked or grouped bar charts.

::::{tip}
Time-based bar charts are great for:
- Comparing values across discrete time periods
- Showing seasonal patterns or cyclical trends
- Highlighting specific days, weeks, or months
- When the exact values for each period matter

For continuous trends, consider using a line chart instead.
::::

### Add reference lines and annotations [reference-lines]

% Need to write instructions for annotations. They were not auto-created.

Reference lines help viewers understand context by showing thresholds, goals, or averages directly on your bar chart.

To add a reference line:

1. Create a **Bar** chart visualization.
2. Click **Add layer**, select the {{data-source}}, then select the **Reference lines** layer type.
3. (Optional) Configure the vertical left axis.
4. Add a reference line with:
   - **Value**: The Y-axis value where the line appears (can be static or calculated)
   - **Label**: Descriptive text like "Target" or "Average"
   - **Color**: Select a contrasting color
   - **Style**: Solid, dashed, or dotted line

> % Step 4 is wrong. The settings that need to be doc'd are pretty extensive. 

Author: ```suggestion
% Step 4 is incomplete. The settings that need to be doc'd are pretty extensive and described above. 
```

% How do users add multiple categories?
2. In the **Vertical axis** appearance settings, find the **Value format** option.
3. Select **Percent**. 

Each bar now shows segments as percentages of that bar's total (summing to 100%).

::::{tip}
Use percentage mode when:
- Relative proportions matter more than absolute values
- You're comparing composition across categories with different totals
- Showing market share, demographic breakdown, or category distribution
::::

## Bar chart settings [settings]

Customize your bar chart to display exactly the information you need, formatted the way you want.

### Horizontal axis settings [horizontal-axis-options]

**Data**
:   The dimension that creates your individual bars. Common options include:
    - **Date histogram**: Create time-based bars with configurable intervals
    - **Filters**: Define custom categories using KQL queries
    - **Intervals**: Group data into numerical ranges
    - **Top values**: Specify fields for which to gather top values 

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the horizontal axis, including:
    - **Name**: Customize the axis label to describe what the bars represent.

>     - **Value format**: Select to display values as number, percent, bytes, bits, duration, or with a custom format.

Author: This only appears if the **Intervals** option is selected.

### Vertical axis settings [vertical-axis-options]

**Data**
:   The metric that determines the height of your bars. When you drag a field onto the vertical axis, {{kib}} suggests a function based on the field type. You can change it and use aggregation functions like `Sum`, `Average`, `Count`, `Median`, `Min`, `Max`, and more, or create custom calculations with formulas. Refer to [](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md#lens-formulas) for examples, or to the {icon}`documentation` **Formula reference** available from Lens.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/lens-value-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the vertical axis, including:

>     - **Name**: By default, the chart uses the function or formula as the axis label. It's a best practice to customize this with a meaningful title.

Author: Addressed

    - **Value format**: Select to display values as number, percent, bytes, bits, duration, or with a custom format.

>     - **Series color**: ?

Author: Color of the bars in the chart?

Author: Addressed

    - **Axis side**: Choose to display the veritical axis on the left or right side of the graph. By default, the axis displays on the left. 

### Break down by settings [breakdown-options]

**Data**
:   Split your bars into segments or groups based on another dimension. Each unique value creates its own segment or bar, allowing you to show composition or compare metrics across multiple dimensions. Common options include:

>     - **Date histogram**: Create time-based bars with configurable intervals

Author: Addressed

>     - **Filters**: Define custom categories using KQL queries

Author: Addressed

::::{tip}
Use grouped bar charts when:
- You need to compare 2-4 metrics across categories
- Direct comparison between metrics is more important than seeing totals
- The metrics have similar scales
::::

### Show trends with time-based bar charts [time-bars]

Bar charts excel at showing trends over time when you need to compare specific time periods or see the distribution of values.

To create a time-based bar chart:

1. Create a **Bar vertical** visualization.
2. Set the **Vertical axis** to your metric (like count, sum, or average).
3. Set the **Horizontal axis** to a date field using the **Date histogram** function.
4. Configure the time interval (auto, minute, hour, day, week, month, year).
5. Optionally add a **Break down by** dimension to stack or group by category.

::::{tip}
Time-based bar charts are great for:
- Comparing values across discrete time periods
- Showing seasonal patterns or cyclical trends
- Highlighting specific days, weeks, or months
- When the exact values for each period matter

For continuous trends, consider using a line chart instead.
::::

### Add reference lines and annotations [reference-lines]
```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.0
serverless: ga
```

> % Not sure why applies to tags were added to this section. From poking around, it looks like the Annotations featuer is in tech preview, so maybe it was an attempt to flag that? Also the instructions for these features don't seem entirely correct. For example, I could only find the Annotations and Reference lines features from adding a new layer to the bar chart. The instructions provided below don't work.

Author: Looks like Claude was mimicking [this](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/3645/files#diff-2435e55705dbba0beccdc164d7e1a0f4e99d4ed3fff0b5743b66a9cbc9844459R72-R78).

    - **Number of values**: The number of segments or groups to show. If more values are available, they can be grouped as **Other**.
    - **Rank by**: The dimension by which values are ranked.
    - **Rank direction**: The direction to use for the ranking.
    - **Collapse by**: Exclude this dimension from the visualization. All metric values sharing the same value for this dimension should be aggregated into a single number.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/lens-breakdown-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the breakdown, including:
    - **Name**: Customize the legend label.
    - **Colors**: Select a color palette or assign specific colors to categories.
    - **Show legend**: Toggle the legend display on or off.
    % Show legends not an option
    - **Legend position**: Place the legend on the right, top, or bottom of the chart.
    % Legend position not an option

### General chart settings [appearance-options]

When creating or editing a visualization, you can customize several appearance options. Look for the {icon}`brush` icon to access these settings.

**Layout**

> % This is not available from the menu that you access when clicking the brush icon.

Author: This comment is affecting the list rendering. Will need to remove once it's addressed.

6. Customize how the annotation appears:
   - **Name**: The name of the annotation. 
   - **Icon decoration**: Allows adding an icon next to the label.
   - **Text decoration**: Selects whether the label shows nothing or the annotation's name.
   - **Line**: Sets stroke width (1 px) plus pattern (solid or dashed).
   - **Color**: Sets the line color.
   - **Hide annotation**: Hides or displays the annotation. By default, this setting is turned off and the annotation is displayed.
   - **Tooltip**: Adds additional fields to the annotation label. 
6. Click **Close** to apply the configurations. Your bar chart will now display the annotations at the appropriate time points.

To edit existing annotations click on them in the annotations list. If you no longer need an annotation, you can delete it.

## Bar chart settings [settings]

Customize your bar chart to display exactly the information you need, formatted the way you want.

> ### Horizontal axis settings [horizontal-axis-options]

Reviewer: Maybe to do in a follow up but those horizontal axis, vertical axis, and breakdown settings look identical for the various time series charts, we could create a snippet that we reuse

### Vertical axis settings [vertical-axis-options]

**Data**
:   The metric that determines the height of your bars. When you drag a field onto the vertical axis, {{kib}} suggests a function based on the field type. You can change it and use aggregation functions like `Sum`, `Average`, `Count`, `Median`, `Min`, `Max`, and more, or create custom calculations with formulas. Refer to [](/explore-analyze/visualize/lens.md#lens-formulas) for examples, or to the {icon}`documentation` **Formula reference** available from Lens.

    :::{include} ../../_snippets/lens-value-advanced-settings.md
    :::

**Appearance**
:   Define the formatting of the vertical axis, including:
    - **Name**: By default, the chart uses the function or formula as the axis label. It's a best practice to customize this with a meaningful title.
    - **Value format**: Select to display values as number, percent, bytes, bits, duration, or with a custom format.
    - **Series color**: Assign a specific color to bars.
    - **Axis side**: Choose to display the veritical axis on the left or right side of the graph. By default, the axis displays on the left. 

### Break down by settings [breakdown-options]

> **Data**

Reviewer: Likewise for this one we should list the additional options available with each of these options

    
    Your selection applies to the entire chart layer, so you can turn labels on for quick KPI-style charts or keep them off for dense histograms.

**Bottom axis**
:   Bottom-axis controls for Lens bar charts let you tune how the horizontal scale looks and behaves. Key options are:
    - **Title**: Set the label that appears under the axis (for example), “Date”); you can hide the label entirely if the layout is tight. 
    - **Gridlines**: Toggles vertical guide lines across the chart, which help compare bar positions against the axis scale.
    - **Tick labels**: Show or hide the textual values beneath the ticks. When visible, the orientation picker lets you rotate them (horizontal, angled, vertical) to avoid overlap on dense timelines.
    - **Orientation**: Set the placement of the bottom axis title. It can be **Horizonta**, **Vertical**, or **Angled**.
    - **Axis scale**: Select linear (default), log, or square-root scaling. Even though this is the bottom axis, it matters for horizontal bar charts or numeric bucketed X-axes.

>     - **Bounds & rounding**: Manually clamp the axis to a min/max or let Lens round to nice intervals; for numeric histograms this also controls whether “nice” bucket labels are used.

Reviewer 2: These option appear as Bottom axis for horizontal bar charts, but in Vertical bar charts they appear as Left axis.

> **Left axis**

Reviewer 2: Similar to the above, these below options would be visible as Bottom axis in Vertical bar charts.
